MSC4278: Media preview controls (#4278)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4278-media-preview-switch.md

Reviewer: Would it be worth extending the global preferences to include room invite images?

Author: Oh yes, that's something I entirely forgot to mention having tunnel visioned on timeline media all day.

Reviewer 2: Implementation requirements:
* [x] Client

all rooms, unless a per-room setting overrides it.

It is also possible for rules to cascade via spaces. A top level space may set a specific rule, and child
rooms may set their own rules. When this is the case, the strictest rule must always be applied.

For instance, given the following hierarchy of rooms within a space tree:

- Acme Corp <"on">
  - Engineering <"private">
    - Room A <"off">
    - Room B <no-value>
  - Support <no-value>
    - Room C <"off">
  - Room D <"off">
  - Room E <no-value>
- Room F

The result would be:
 - Room A, Room C and Room D would be "off".
 - Room B would be "private".
 - Room E would be "on".
 - Room F is out of the space, and would default to the user's global rule.

### Notes

It's important here that this account data MUST be configurable by a user.

Homeservers COULD specify a default value ahead of time for the user, by setting a default
value internally for the account data. The user *must* be able to mutate this value.

Not all clients will respect this configuration initially, and many clients will continue to support
their own variant of this setting in the short term.

## Potential issues

> TODO: Write this up.

Author: @Half-Shot needs to write this up.

My thoughts are primarily that this is more things the client needs to track, and the cascading model is quite heavy for clients to build. in an OOB convo we remarked that spaces are already quite heavy.

This also presents a minor UX challenge for clients, they will need to expose this setting at least 3 times:

 - In the global client settings
 - In spaces
 - In individual rooms

and then keep those settings in sync with other clients. This is a tall order, but I think we do need the granularity because if it's too coarse people will just switch it on/off and have a bad time, or at worst stop federating.

Author: I've chopped the cascading model.

> 

Author: Additionally "on"|"off" may be too coarse for invites.

Reviewer 3: A setting based on whether you already share a (joined) DM with the inviter could be quite powerful as a trivial form of (cheap) "trust" where checking is just cross-referencing the `m.direct` global account_data

Author: This has been added to the alternatives section. The idea is nice albeit I think I'd like to include that in another MSC.

degree of safety, and other networks are open to the public internet and are inheriently less safe. This proposal
aims to give the user more universal control over the content they see on Matrix, starting with media previews.

Most graphical Matrix clients display media in the timeline of a room with a preview. Often these are delivered
without any consent prompt, at least by default. This presents a risk to users who may be joining the network
and do not have the same safety barriers that experienced users may have configured.

With that in mind, this MSC provides a simple switch for users and homeservers to configure a global media preview
preference.

For the purposes of this MSC, the term "undesirable content" refers to images that the user does not want to see,
be it illegal, abusive or otherwise unwanted.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new account data key, `m.media_preview_config`.

This key contains the following content.

```json
{
  "media_previews": "off|on|private",
  "invite_avatars": "off|on"
}
```

`media_previews` refers to media in the room timeline, that may be thumbnailed.

> `invite_avatars` refers to any *room* avatar rendered in the client, where the client has a `membership` of `invite`.

Author: Ah yes, should be clear it's not the user avatar but *any* third party media used in the presentation of a room you are invited into. Will clarify.

The fields `media_previews` and `invite_avatars` may be one of three values.

#### `off`

The client MUST NOT show any previews for any media in affected rooms.

Users may individually consent to seeing media, for example by clicking on a prompt to show a preview.

If consent is given, the client SHOULD then track that consent and show the media again in the future.

This value is the **default** setting for `invite_avatars` when no account data exists on the user's account.

> #### `on`

Reviewer 4: Other platforms (discord for example) offers more than just on/off. It offers on/blur/block.
I think that it is a good addition. Clients that do not support blur could just block in that case.

The blured image gives a rough idea of the image without exposing the user to the real image.

Without that how is a user expected to react to a `off` image? Never click on it or take the risk and click on it?

Reviewer 5: The main trouble with `blur` is that the picture is fetched and ends up in both the client and the server cache. It's quite bad if it's illegal content.

We may still want the `blur` option for private federations however ? I wouldn't recommend that as a default for the public federation because of ^.

Author: blur*hashes* do not, as they're part of the event's metadata https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2448 (unless it's user avatars, which is a different kettle o fish)

But I think it's probably subjective whether there is enough information in a blurred image to tell you whether something is NSFW. Also, clients can *lie* about the hash so if anything it's likely to be abused as much as avatars.

I'd probably say blurs are really just useful as loading indicators but otherwise should be for trusted media.

Author: Covered in b979b87b2df20804486ff3b802b07a08caf515e6

#### `private`

Previws for media MAY be shown in "private" rooms without a prompt. A private room is any room where:
  - The `m.room.join_rules` state exists.
  - The `join_rule` key of this state is `invite`, `knock`, `restricted`, or `knock_restricted`.

If any other `join_rule` is set, or cannot be determined by the client then the assumption MUST be that the
room is public and previews should not be shown. Future join rules may be added to this list, but it's critical
that clients adopt a safety first approach here.

This value is the **default** setting for `media_previews` when no account data exists on the user's account.

Note that this setting has no effect for `invite_avatars`. Avatars can only be `off` or `on` for all invites. 
Bad actors can easily send a DM to a user (which would pass the `private` check) containing unwanted
content.

### Levels

The account data may exist at both the global and room level. The global setting defines the preference for
all rooms, unless a per-room setting overrides it.

It is also possible for rules to cascade via spaces. A top level space may set a specific rule, and child

> rooms may set their own rules. When this is the case, the strictest rule must always be applied.

Reviewer 6: Could this selective inheritance lead to confusing situations where you cannot set per-room controls anymore because a parent space has set stricter controls?

Author: I think clients would need to figure out how to convey that sanely (perhaps greying out the options that *would* be overuled).

Equally, this section might be up for the chop if we can't find a sane way to design it into clients..

  - The `m.room.join_rules` state exists.
  - The `join_rule` key of this state is `invite`, `knock`, `restricted`, or `knock_restricted`.

If any other `join_rule` is set, or cannot be determined by the client then the assumption MUST be that the
room is public and previews should be shown. Future join rules may be added to this list, but it's critical
that clients adopt a safety first approach here.

This value is the **default** setting when no account data exists on the user's account.

### Levels

The account data may exist at both the global and room level. The global setting defines the preference for
all rooms, unless a per-room setting overrides it.

It is also possible for rules to cascade via spaces. A top level space may set a specific rule, and child
rooms may set their own rules. When this is the case, the strictest rule must always be applied.

For instance, given the following hierarchy of rooms within a space tree:

- Acme Corp <"on">
  - Engineering <"private">
    - Room A <"off">
    - Room B <no-value>
  - Support <no-value>
    - Room C <"off">
  - Room D <"off">
  - Room F <no-value>

> - Room F

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Room E
```

The result would be:
 - Room A, Room C and Room D would be "off".
 - Room B would be "private".

>  - Room E would be "on".

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
 - Room F would be "on".
```

# MSC4278: Media preview controls

Matrix caters to a wide variety of networks configurations. Some networks are closed and the users have a high
degree of safety, and other networks are open to the public internet and are inheriently less safe. This proposal
aims to give the user more universal control over the content they see on Matrix, starting with media previews.

Most graphical Matrix clients display media in the timeline of a room with a preview. Often these are delivered
without any consent prompt, at least by default. This presents a risk to users who may be joining the network
and do not have the same safety barriers that experienced users may have configured.

With that in mind, this MSC provides a simple switch for users and homeservers to configure a global media preview
preference.

For the purposes of this MSC, the term "undesirable content" refers to images that the user does not want to see,

> be it illegal, abusive or otherwise wanted.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
be it illegal, abusive or otherwise unwanted.
```

Author: that's a bad one :sweat:

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new account data key, `m.media_preview_config`.

This key contains the following content.

```json
{
  "media_previews": "off|on|private",
  "invite_avatars": "off|on"
}
```

> `media_previews` refers to media in the room timeline, that may be thumbnailed.

Reviewer 9: Does this include user avatars, or media in reactions from [MSC4027](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4027)? The text should probably spell that out explicitly. If they are not included, we should consider separate fields to control them. User avatars, in particular, are a common abuse vector in my experience. Most current clients that have a "hide media" option do not hide user avatars.

Author: +1 to spelling it out. 

It's a good question. This originally focused on timeline media, either m.image/m.video, m.sticker, or inline media but reactions and avatars are other possible abuse vectors.

My feeling is that for reactions, it might just be suitable to show the alt text in public rooms. For user avatars, I think losing all avatars in a public room might be a bit extreme. One way we could go about this is allowing users to click-to-consent to individual avatars in public rooms like we have for Element's previews, and then that is tracked. We'd need some way to cascade rules from spaces so that people in my trusted circle are automatically permitted.

And of course the problem with all this is the client needs to clearly tell you *why* an avatar is/isn't displaying to prevent it looking like a bug.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, that all makes sense, and I think points towards having a separate field for hiding avatars. Personally, there are some rooms that get frequent spam with abusive avatars where I would 100% turn on "hide all avatars" if it was an option in the client. The ability to selectively show avatars from trusted users (or even manually enabling avatars for everybody in the room periodically when there isn't spam happening) would be preferable. I wouldn't want to bog down this MSC with the complexity of per-user switches though, and am happy with incremental improvement.

Author: Tried to tidy this up in 2e2573fe519d8e9596e23d65b22384c1f57a914c

`invite_avatars` refers to any *room* avatar rendered in the client, where the client has a `membership` of `invite`.

The fields `media_previews` and `invite_avatars` may be one of three values.

#### `off`

> The client MUST not show any previews for any media, in the room.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The client MUST NOT show any previews for any media in affected rooms.
```

Users may individually consent to seeing media, for example by clicking on a prompt to show a preview.

If consent is given, the client SHOULD then track that consent and show the media again in the future.

#### `on`

Media MAY be shown in any room without a prompt. 

> Users may individually hide media, and this preference must be respected over the room defaults.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Users may individually hide media, and this preference MUST be respected over any defaults defined in `m.media_preview_config`.
```

"the room defaults" sounds like it only includes the room-level account data.

#### `private`

Previws for media MAY be shown in "private" rooms without a prompt. A private room is any room where:
  - The `m.room.join_rules` state exists.
  - The `join_rule` key of this state is `invite`, `knock`, `restricted`, or `knock_restricted`.

If any other `join_rule` is set, or cannot be determined by the client then the assumption MUST be that the

> room is public and previews should be shown. Future join rules may be added to this list, but it's critical

Reviewer 10: Are we missing a "not" here?

```suggestion
room is public and previews should not be shown. Future join rules may be added to this list, but it's critical
```

Reviewer 8: Should actually be a "MUST NOT", I think.

> room is public and previews should be shown. Future join rules may be added to this list, but it's critical

Reviewer 8: This should clarify that for (presumed-)public rooms, the opt-in behaviour is the same as for `off` ("Users may individually consent to seeing media[...]") and for private rooms, the opt-out behaviour is the same as for `on` ("Users may individually hide media[...]").

Author: Fixed in f1283f05d3c99601b634cfa18b7242eec3e0feff

that clients adopt a safety first approach here.

This value is the **default** setting when no account data exists on the user's account.

> Note that this setting has no effect for `invite_avatars`. Avatars can only be `off` or `on` for all invites. 

Reviewer 10: Can we state what should be the default value for `invite_avatars`?

Bad actors can easily send a DM to a user (which would pass the `private` check) containing unwanted
content.

### Levels

The account data may exist at both the global and room level. The global setting defines the preference for
all rooms, unless a per-room setting overrides it.

It is also possible for rules to cascade via spaces. A top level space may set a specific rule, and child

> rooms may set their own rules. When this is the case, the strictest rule must always be applied.

Reviewer 11: The below example should probably explore rooms that are in multiple spaces.

Author: Cascading over spaces was dropped in this MSC, so closing this.

For instance, given the following hierarchy of rooms within a space tree:

- Acme Corp <"on">
  - Engineering <"private">
    - Room A <"off">
    - Room B <no-value>
  - Support <no-value>
    - Room C <"off">
  - Room D <"off">
  - Room E <no-value>
- Room F

The result would be:
 - Room A, Room C and Room D would be "off".
 - Room B would be "private".
 - Room E would be "on".
 - Room F is out of the space, and would default to the user's global rule.

### Notes

It's important here that this account data MUST be configurable by a user.

> Homeservers COULD specify a default value ahead of time for the user, by setting a default

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Homeservers MAY specify a default value ahead of time for the user, by setting a default
```

value internally for the account data. The user *must* be able to mutate this value.

Not all clients will respect this configuration initially, and many clients will continue to support
their own variant of this setting in the short term.

## Potential issues

### The field is extremely coarse 

This provides a blanket setting for all rooms and content received, rather than this applying to rooms

> specifically (via a state key or otherwise). 

Reviewer 8: "The account data may exist at both the global and room level" seems to contradict this, or am I misunderstanding something?

### Requires adjustments to well-known

This proposal requires administrators to adjust their well-known, which means that bad-actor homeservers
may potentially set the value of `content_trust_level` to `trusted` even if the content is not trusted.

This is mitigated by users being able to override settings, but does however mean that unsuspecting users

> may be more exposed to content than they should be.

Reviewer 8: This seems to be from a different proposal entirely

Author: Errmhphh, yes this was from the previous one and should have gone in the bin.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 11: Maybe another alternative is to key on sender, not on room type? Ie sharing a private room with a user might be enough to trust their media?

I think at some point someone had explored the idea of "trusted users"...

Reviewer 3: See my suggestion above https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4278/files#r2037916930 for a cheaper approach

Author: I think this is covered by alternatives now?

# MSC4278: Media preview controls

Matrix caters to a wide variety of networks configurations. Some networks are closed and the users have a high
degree of safety, and other networks are open to the public internet and are inherently less safe. This proposal
aims to give the user more universal control over the content they see on Matrix, starting with media previews.

Most graphical Matrix clients display media in the timeline of a room with a preview. Often these are delivered
without any consent prompt, at least by default. This presents a risk to users who may be joining the network
and do not have the same safety barriers that experienced users may have configured.

With that in mind, this MSC provides a simple switch for users and homeservers to configure a global media preview
preference.

For the purposes of this MSC, the term "undesirable content" refers to images that the user does not want to see,
be it illegal, abusive or otherwise unwanted.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new account data key, `m.media_preview_config`.

This key contains the following content.

```json
{
  "media_previews": "off|private|on",
  "invite_avatars": "off|on"
}

> ```

Reviewer 6: The proposal and some of the threads already touch upon possible future extensions of the config. Do we need to account for a case where more than one mode can be active at a time?

For instance, lets say a new mode `moderated` is introduced in future to allow media previews in rooms that are governed by a moderation bot. I now may want to allow previews in both `private` and `moderated` rooms but the structure of `m.media_preview_config` only allows one at a time.

### `media_previews`

`media_previews` refers to any media that may be automatically rendered in the context of a room without user
interaction, like a thumbnail.

Clients should show show or hide media depending upon this setting, on at least the following content types:

 - Media message types `m.image`, `m.video`, `m.file` which all can include thumbnail information or be thumbnailed
 by the home server.
 - The `m.sticker` event type.
 - Inline media via `img`.

>  - Any event which includes thumbnail information or may be thumbnailed by the home server.

Reviewer 12: Should images from URL previews be included in this list?  (especially [previews generated by the event sender](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4095))

Reviewer 13: I'd say yes, since even without MSC4095, an attacker can trivially make a website that previews whatever malicious media they want

MSC2448 also defines blurhashes for URL previews, which may be useful for clients that want to hide the preview images

The above list is not exhaustive as future event types may increase the scope of media in the context of a room,

> but offers a reference point for clients. 

Author: I ended up saying as much:

>The above list is not exhaustive. Other MSCs SHOULD take this setting into account when rendering content that could
be considered a media preview, such as [MSC4027](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4027). 

The burden is shifted onto other MSCs. It may be useful if the SCT would keep this spec in mind (when it lands) when reviewing other MSCs which include media.

required to be filtered by the same logic. A future MSC may explore how to handle user avatars.

### `invite_avatars`

`invite_avatars` refers to any **room** avatar rendered in the client, where the client has a `membership` of `invite`.

This may typically be rendered in the form of an invite dialog, or a room list preview of a room.

The avatar may refer to:

 - The `m.room.avatar` state event.
 - The inviting user's `avatar_url` from their profile (in the case of a DM).

In *all* cases where an avatar may be rendered for a room invite, the preview should be controlled by the setting.

### Property value

#### `off`

The client MUST NOT show any previews for any media in affected rooms. Clients SHOULD hide the media entirely,
behind a click-to-view prompt, or some other mechanism where a user is either prevented entirely or must consent
to see the media.

Users may individually consent to seeing media, for example by clicking on a prompt to show a preview.

If consent is given, the client SHOULD then track that consent and show the media again in the future.

#### `private`

Previews for media MAY be shown in "private" rooms without a prompt. A private room is any room where 

> the `m.room.join_rules` state exists AND `join_rule` key of this state is `invite`, `knock`, `restricted`, or `knock_restricted`.

Reviewer 2: I don't expect the MSC to mention this, but FYI the T&S team is (slowly) working on a formal technical definition for the word "private". It's very close to what this MSC describes at the moment, but is a little different.

This MSC can do what it's currently doing in my opinion. T&S will "fix" it later, if needed.

Reviewer 11: This is closely related to what I was going to ask -- is this defining a new term which conflicts with the existing usage of "private" in the spec?

If any other `join_rule` is set, or cannot be determined by the client then the assumption MUST be that the
room is public and previews MUST not be shown. Future join rules may be added to this list, but it's critical
that clients adopt a safety first approach here.

Note that this setting has no effect for `invite_avatars`. Avatars can only be `off` or `on` for all invites. 
Bad actors can easily send a DM to a user (which would pass the `private` check) containing unwanted
content.

#### `on`

Media MAY be shown in any room without a prompt. 

Users may individually hide media, and this preference MUST be respected over any defaults defined in `m.media_preview_config`.

This value is the **default** setting for both properties when no value is set, to keep with the previous defaults.

### Levels

The account data may exist at both the global and room level. The global setting defines the preference for
all rooms, unless a per-room setting overrides it.

### Notes

Homeservers MAY specify a default value ahead of time for the user, by setting a default

> value internally for the account data. The user *must* be able to mutate this value, as it's

Reviewer 14: As the reason for allowing mutation is for safety of the user, then should it be that the server MUST allow the user to choose a more restrictive setting, but the homeserver MAY enforce a minimum.e.g. A server policy could be set as follows: allowed media_previews values: off, private (default)
